Today's topic is Web Cache or the HTTP
Caching Headers.
As users we get frustrated when the
websites are slow.
And to improve the performance, we
normally use some kind of caching,
which can either be on the server-side
in the form of
application level caching, for example
using Redis or Memcached
or it can be on the client-side. So when
the request comes for a resource,
it will be checked in the cache. If it is
not found in the cache,
then the request will be sent to the
server, the response will be fetched from
there and then it will be cached.
And in the future when the same
resource is requested again,
there will be no more calls to the
server, the item will be found in the cache
and it will be returned from there.
This brings us a couple of benefits.
So, first of all we have the faster
response times.
Because the requests are not going to
the server, so our response times are
going to be much
lower. Secondly, because the items are
returned from the cache
and not the server, so our server
bandwidth usage
is going to decrease also. And the third
one is the less load on the server.
Because not all the requests are going
to the server, the load on the server
is also going to decrease.
Alright so now that we know the benefits of the
caching and what the caching is,
let's look at the caching locations.
So the cache can be in one of the three locations.
First of all we have the browser cache
so the browser you use
might cache the  response from any
previous visits, it depends on the
caching headers which we will see in a minute.
And the cache in the browser is private to the specific user using the website.
Next we have the proxy
cache which is the cache
at the proxy level. I will make a
detailed video on what the proxies and
the reverse proxies are.
But for now just know that the proxies
are installed either by your ISP
or by the organization you work at. And
the content
might also be cached there. And the last
one we have is the reverse proxy,
which is the proxy that is closer to our
server,
is set up by the server administrators
and the content
might also be cached there. Okay, now that
we know what the caching is what are the
benefits of the caching
and the common places for the caching,
let's look at some terminology
before we jump on to discuss the caching
headers and how the caching works. First of all
we have the client
which is your browser or any application
requesting the server
for some resources. Then we have the
origin server,
which is the source of truth, the place
where we find the content from.
And then on any location of the caching,
we might have stale content,
which is the content which is cached but
it is expired.
And then we have the fresh content, which
is cached and it is still usable because it has
not expired yet. And then we have some actions such as
content validation:
which is a process of contacting the
server to check the validity of the
cached content and to get it updated if
it is expired.
And lastly we have the cache
invalidation, which is the process of
removing any stale content
which is available in the cache. With
that out of the way,
let's understand how the content gets
cached in any of the locations that we
have discussed above.
HTTP headers play the key role in
caching the content
at any of the places. Whenever the server
sends the response to the client,
it sends the HTTP headers in the
response,
which are then used by the client or any
other intermediate places to cache the
content.
Let's look at the caching headers and
see how they work.
We have mainly expires pragma and the
cache-control.
Expires and Pragma were there before
HTTP 1.1,
and they aren't used as much. But you
might see them
being used for the backward
compatibility. Cache-control was
introduced in the HTTP 1.1 and it is the preferred
way of caching and everything that you can do with
expires and pragma, it's also possible
with the cache-control.
We also have some validator headers
which are used by the client to make
sure that the cached content
is still usable. Let's look at each of
these headers in detail.
First of all we have the Expires header.
The value for expires header is the
absolute expiry date till which the
response can be cached.
Some of the things that you should note
about the expired headers are:
the value can't be more than one year.
And if you provide the invalid value
or return the wrong date format, the
response will be considered stale.
Next we have the pragma header. The only
possible value for that
is no cache. It is one of the pre-HTTP/1.1
headers and it was used to prevent
the caching. You should prefer to use the
cache-control over it, but you might
still see it being used.
And the reason for that is the backward
compatibility. So
that the clients that don't support
cache control, they might be using this
header to avoid the caching. And finally, in the
caching headers we have the cache-control header,
which is the preferred caching header
and it was introduced in
HTTP/1.1. It's a multi-value header, so it
can have multiple values or
directives, and they determine the
caching behavior.
Let's look at the possible values for
the cache-control header.
First of all we have the private
directive. If the cache is set to private,
it means that the content is private to
the user, and it will only be cached in
the client or the browser. Next we have the public
directive, which means that the cache
is available to multiple users and it
can be cached publicly at any of the proxies.
Next we have the
no-store, which means that the content can't be
cached anywhere. So every time the client needs the
resource, it must make the call to the server
for the fresh copy. Next we have the no-cache value,
which means that the content can be
cached, but for client to reuse it, it
must first validate it from the server.
This is done using ETag header, for
example, which you will see in a second.
Then, we have the max-age which tells the
client that the content can be cached for the given
number of seconds. So if you get a value like this
it would mean that the content can be
cached at any public places
or the proxies for 3600 seconds,
or 60 minutes. And having private would
mean that the content can only be cached at the client
and not any other place for 60 minutes.
Next we have s-max age. The prefix
`-s` stands for the shared. It is same as
max-age but gives the
caching duration for the shared places
or the proxies.
And in the cases when you have both the
max-age and the
s-max age values present, it will take
the max-age value for the client-side
caching and s-max age value for the shared
caching. Next we have must-revalidate.
Sometimes, it might happen that the server is not reachable.
Or there is a network issue. In that case,
the client might serve the cached
content, even if it is stale. If you have
must-revalidate in the value for the cache-control
it won't allow using the stale content
and the content must be revalidated from
the server before serving. If you look at the
example value that I have here, if you don't have the must re-validate
directive, client might keep serving the cached content
even after it has expired i.e. after the max-age
of 600 seconds has passed and the
server is not reachable for the fresh content
But if you have the must-revalidate present,
the client can only serve the cash content for 600 seconds.
And after that, it must fetch it from the
server. And if the server is not
reachable, it won't serve the cached content
because it is stale.
Next we have the proxy-revalidate, which
is same as must revalidate but it applies
to the proxies, or the shared caching. So
if the given header is present, it would
mean that the client may keep serving
the stale content available at the
client if let's say it is not connected to the
internet or it has network issues but if it is able
to connect to the proxy and there is stale content at the proxy,
proxy can't use the stale content and it must get it from the server.
A note about mixing the values for the cache-control:
you can mix the cache control values however you want
to achieve the caching behavior you
require for your application.
For example, the value that I'm showing here right now,
it means that the cache is going to be
public, so it can be stored at the
proxies level as well as on the client with the
max-age of 3600 seconds.
We are setting the client level caching
to be one hour. And with the s-max-age of 600 seconds,
we are setting the proxy level caching to be 600 seconds.
and also, since we have the must-revalidate
present, the client will never serve the stale content,
and it must fetch the fresh content from
the server whenever it is expired.
Up until now, we only discussed how the
content is cached and how long the
cached content is to be considered fresh
but we did not discuss
how the client does the validation from
the server. For that, server might send
one or more validation headers in the response,
which are used by the client to make a
conditional request to the server.
First of all we have the e-tags or the entity tags.
When serving the content, server normally sends an e-tag header
in the response which is just a unique
identifier associated to the resource.
Client then uses this ETag to make a
request to the server,
to check if the content has been changed.
Let's consider a scenario where the
client requested an image,
and the server responded with the image
and the following cache control and ETag headers.
Now the client will keep using the image
from the cache for 3600 seconds
or one hour and after one hour, client
will make the call to the server with
the if-none-match header and it will send
the ETag of the resource
in the call. The server will then match
the ETag of the resource with the newly
available resource.
If it doesn't match, server will respond
with the new ETag and the new resource
which will then be used to replace the
current image.
If it does match the existing image, the
server will respond with the status code
of 304 which means "Not modified". And the
client will renew the cash for another 3600 seconds.
Before we move on there are two types of ETags.
Strong and the weak. First example is the strong ETag.
and it means that the two resources are exactly same.
and there is no difference between them
at all. Weak tags are prefixed with the
"W/" and they mean that the two resources are
although not strictly same,
but could be considered same. Next we
have last-modified, which indicates the date and time when
the content was last modified.
When the content gets stale client, it will
make the conditional request with the last modified date
using the if-modified-since header, which
will then be used by the server to
either return 304 — Not modified, or to return the new response.
Now you might be asking yourself, what if
both the ETag and the last-modified headers are
present in the response. What header will then be used by the
client to make the validation request
to the server? Well in that case, the
client will send both the parameters in the validation
request. The ETag in the if-none-match header and the
modified date in the if-modified-since header and the
server checks both the values to either return
304 Not Modified or to return the new content.
Okay, so what about the case when the
server did not send any of these
validation headers?
Well in that case, there will be no calls
to validate and refresh the existing cache
and the fresh content will be requested
as soon as the content gets stale.
Alright, now that we know the caching
headers and the validation,
you might be asking yourself what should
be your caching strategy?
There is no global answer to that. It
varies and depends on the nature of your
application but normally it might fall into two
categories: light caching for the items
where you need the client to validate
with the server. For example your html files where you
can make the client cache it but it must validate it with the
server before using it. This way we are making
sure that the client always gets the latest html whenever we
have it available on the server
but if the HTML files have not been
updated, it can avoid the download
and serve the one that it has cached in
the browser. For the dynamic content, it depends on
your needs. So, for example, if you have
RSS feed for your blog,
you might cache it publicly for two
hours but if you have product listing
let's say JSON for an E-Commerce website,
you might have a different kind of
caching headers. In the response
for the assets, you can have aggressive
caching. So for example, here I am caching my CSS, JavaScript and
the images for an year in the public caches
and I might use the fingerprinted file names.
So for example my build system will
generate a different file name for each build
and inject them into my HTML. So whenever
the client will request the HTML, it will
see that the links have been changed, so it will load
the new assets from the original server, instead of serving them
from the cache.
And lastly, to debug the http headers, you
can either do it with the curl command
with the option `-I`
which will give you the headers from the
response, or you can do it from the dev tools
in the network tab.
I hope you enjoyed the video, if you have
any questions or comments leave them below and I will see you in
the next one.